.TH AQUALUNG 1 "07 July 2007"
.SH NAME
aqualung \- Music player for GNU/Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
aqualung --help
.TP
aqualung --version
.TP
aqualung [--output (oss|alsa|jack|win32)] [options] [file1 [file2 ...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.P
Aqualung is a music player originally designed for the
GNU/Linux operating system, but also running on FreeBSD, Cygwin
and NT-based versions of Microsoft Windows. It plays audio CDs,
streams and audio files from your filesystem and has the feature
of inserting \fBno gaps\fR between adjacent tracks. It
also supports high quality sample rate conversion between the
file and the output device, when necessary.
.P
Audio CDs can be played back and ripped with on-the-fly
conversion to WAV, FLAC, Ogg Vorbis or CBR/VBR MP3 (gapless via
LAME). Seamless tagging of the created files is offered as part
of the process. Internet radio stations streaming Ogg Vorbis or
MP3 are supported. Almost all sample-based, uncompressed formats
(e.g. WAV, AIFF, AU etc.), as well as files encoded with FLAC
(the Free Lossless Audio Codec), Ogg Vorbis, Ogg Speex, MPEG
Audio (including the infamous MP3 format), MOD audio formats
(MOD, S3M, XM, IT, etc.), Musepack and Monkey's Audio Codec are
supported. Numerous formats and codecs are also supported via
the FFmpeg project, including AC3, AAC, WMA, WavPack and the
soundtrack of many video formats. The program can play the music
through OSS, ALSA or the JACK Audio Connection Kit, or even
using the Win32 Sound API (available only under Cygwin or native
Win32). Depending on the compile-time options, not all file
formats and output drivers may be usable. Type aqualung
-v to get a list of all the compiled-in features.
.P
Aqualung supports the LADSPA 1.1 plugin standard. You can use
any suitable plugin to enhance the music you are listening
to.
.P
Other features of the program are: tabbed playlist,
internally working volume and balance controls (not touching the
soundcard mixer), multiple skin support, random seeking during
playback, track repeat, list repeat and shuffle mode (besides
normal playback). In track repeat mode the looping range is
adjustable. Aqualung will come up in the same state as it was
when you closed it, including playback modes, volume and balance
settings, currently processing LADSPA plugins, window sizes,
positions and visibility, and other miscellaneous
options. Aqualung has the ability to display and edit Ogg Xiph
comments, ID3v1, ID3v2 and APE tags found in files that support
them.
.P
Currently metadata editing capability is considered dangerous
and is turned off by default, because the TagLib library which
Aqualung uses for metadata access has some yet unfixed, serious
bugs which may cause invalid tags to be written or may result in
outright corrupt (unplayable) files. If you decide to build
Aqualung with metadata editing support, make sure to have
backups of your files and proceed with care.
.P
You can control any running instance of the program remotely
from the command line (start, stop, pause etc.). Remote loading
or enqueueing soundfiles as well as complete playlists is also
supported.
.P
In addition to all this, Aqualung provides a so-called Music
Store that is an XML-based music database, capable of storing
various metadata about music on your computer (including, but
not limited to, the names of artists, and the titles of records
and tracks). You can (and should) organize your music into trees
of Artists/Records/Tracks, thereby making life easier than with
the all-in-one Winamp/XMMS playlist. Importing file metadata
(ID3v1, ID3v2 tags, Ogg Xiph comments, APE metadata) into the
Music Store as well as getting track names from a CDDB/FreeDB
database is supported. For audio CDs, CD-Text retrieval is also
implemented.
.P
Please refer to the documentation available at the homepage for a
detailed description of features, usage tips and troubleshooting
issues. This manual page is merely an abstract from the User's Manual,
and documents only the command line interface of the program for quick
reference.
.SH OPTIONS
.P
Normally you should be able to start Aqualung
without any options. This case the output device will be
selected by probing for a usable driver (in order of JACK,
ALSA, OSS) with default parameters.
.P
If no driver could be started with default
parameters, or you want to explicitly choose a suitable output
configuration, you have to tell the program which output
device to use. This is possible with the -o
(--output) option. There are specific optional
parameters for all four output drivers. You can also specify
which sample rate converter you want to use, or request a list
of available converters. You may also control another instance
of the program remotely, or add files to the Playlist.

.TP
.B General options
.TP
-D, --disk-realtime
.br
Try to use realtime (SCHED_FIFO) scheduling
for disk thread, a background worker thread doing file
decoding and sample rate conversion. Try this (and
optionally -Y) if you experience short audio
dropouts caused by other programs (e.g. web browser loading
a complex page).
.TP
-Y, --disk-priority <int>
.br
When running -D, set scheduler priority to
<int> (defaults to 1).

.TP
.B Options relevant to ALSA output
.TP
-d, --device <name>
.br
Set the output device (defaults to plughw:0,0).
.TP
-p, --period <int>
.br
Set ALSA period size (defaults to 8192).
.TP
-n, --nperiods <int>
.br
Specify the number of periods in hardware buffer
(defaults to 2).
.TP
-r, --rate <int>
.br
Set the output sample rate.
.TP
-R, --realtime
.br
Try to use realtime (SCHED_FIFO) scheduling
for ALSA output thread.
.TP
-P, --priority <int>
.br
When running --realtime, set scheduler
priority to <int> (defaults to 1).

.TP
.B Options relevant to OSS output
.TP
-d, --device <name>
.br
Set the output device (defaults to
/dev/dsp).
.TP
-r, --rate <int>
.br
Set the output sample rate.

.TP
.B Options relevant to JACK output
.TP
-a[<port_L>,<port_R>],
--auto[=<port_L>,<port_R>]
.br
Auto-connect output ports to given JACK ports
(defaults to first two hardware playback ports).
.TP
-c, --client <name>
.br
Set client name (needed if you want to run multiple
instances of the program).
.P
Note that in the case when JACK output has been selected
as part of the automatic output device detection, the
-a option is implicitly applied.

.TP
.B Options relevant to Win32 output
.TP
-r, --rate <int>
.br
Set the output sample rate.

.TP
.B Options relevant to the Sample Rate Converter
.TP
-s[<int>], --srctype[=<int>]
.br
Choose the SRC type, or print the list of available
types if no number given. The default is SRC type 4 (Linear
Interpolator).

.TP
.B Options for remote cue control
.P
Note that remote controlling of instances is only possible
if the instance you want to send a command to is running as
the same user as you are when you issue the remote command.
.TP
-N, --session <int>
.br
Specify the instance number to send the remote command
to. Instances are numbered on a per user basis, starting
with 0. Except for the zero-th instance (started first), the
instance number is displayed in the title bar of the main
window (e.g.: `Aqualung.3'). If you don't use this
option, the following options will control the zero-th
instance by default, except for -L which defaults
to the present instance (so as to be able to start playback
immediately from the command line).
.TP
-B, --back
.br
Jump to previous track.
.TP
-F, --fwd
.br
Jump to next track.
.TP
-L, --play
.br
Start playing.
.TP
-U, --pause
.br
Pause playback, or resume if already paused.
.TP
-T, --stop
.br
Stop playback.
.TP
-V, --volume [m|M]|[=]<val>
.br
Adjust the volume. m/M means
mute; if = is present, the remote instance's
volume control will be set to the value specified,
otherwise, the volume will be adjusted by the supplied
(signed) value. The values are in dB units.
.TP
-Q, --quit
.br
Terminate remote instance.

.TP
.B Options for file loading
.P
You may specify filenames on the command line. These may be
ordinary soundfiles playable by Aqualung, directories, or
playlist files you saved earlier. The program will decide if a
file is a playlist, and add its contents accordingly. In
addition to Aqualung's native (XML) playlist format, the
program will load M3U and PLS playlists whenever possible.
.P
If you used the --session option (see above),
the files will be sent to the Aqualung instance you
specified. Otherwise a new instance will start up with the
files you specified. Note that if you enabled the \fBSave
and restore the Playlist on exit/startup\fR option in the
\fBSettings\fR dialog, the files you specify will be
loaded \fBafter\fR the automatically loaded ones.
.TP
-E, --enqueue
.br
Enqueue added files to the Playlist instead of loading
them (which removes the previous contents of the
Playlist). Use this if you want to keep the existing items
in the Playlist.
.TP
-t[<name>], --tab[=<name>]
.br
Specify target tab for file loading (either remotely
using the --session option, or at startup). If
--tab is used without the name parameter, the
files will be added to a new (untitled) tab. If a name is
supplied, Aqualung will check whether a tab with that name
already exists. If so, the files will be loaded (or enqueued
if you used -E) to that tab. If no such tab
exists, one with that name will be created, and content goes
there.

.TP
.B Options for changing state of Playlist/Music Store windows
.TP
-l [yes|no], --show-pl=[yes|no]
.br
Show/hide Playlist window.
.TP
-m [yes|no], --show-ms=[yes|no]
.br
Show/hide music store window.

.TP
.B Examples
.TP
$ aqualung -s3 -o alsa -R -r 48000 -d hw:0,0 -p 2048 -n 2
.TP
$ aqualung --srctype=1 -output oss -rate 96000
.TP
$ aqualung -o jack -a -E --tab="Led Zeppelin" `find ./ledzeppelin/ -name \*.flac`
.SH FILES
.P
Here is a list of files that Aqualung creates, reads and
relies on.
.TP
~/.aqualung
.br
Directory containing user settings.
.TP
~/.aqualung/config.xml
.br
GUI (skin, window size/position, etc.) and other
settings.
.TP
~/.aqualung/plugin.xml
.br
List of running plugins and all their settings.
.TP
~/.aqualung/playlist.xml
.br
Automatically saved and restored playlist (if you enable
this feature).
.TP
~/.aqualung/<skin-name>
.br
Locally available skin <skin-name> (useful for
skin development).
.TP
${prefix}/share/aqualung/skin
.br
System-wide skin directory.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.P
Aqualung obeys two environment variables
concerning LADSPA plugins.
.TP
LADSPA_PATH
.br
Colon-separated list of paths to search for LADSPA
plugin .so files.
.TP
LADSPA_RDF_PATH
.br
Colon-separated list of paths to RDF metadata files
about these plugins.
.P
When any of these is not specified, the
program will use sensible defaults and look in the obvious
places.

.SH AUTHORS
.br
Tom Szilagyi <tszilagyi@users.sourceforge.net>
.br
Peter Szilagyi <peterszilagyi@users.sourceforge.net>
.br
Tomasz Maka <pasp@users.sourceforge.net>
.SH BUGS
.P
Yes. Report them to our bugtracker at <http://aqualung.sf.net/mantis>
or write to our mailing list (the subscription interface is accessible
from the project homepage).
.SH HOMEPAGE
.P
Please go to <http://aqualung.sf.net> to download the latest version,
access the Aqualung bugtracker and subscribe to the mailing list.
.SH USER'S MANUAL
.P
The latest version of the User's Manual is available at the project homepage.
